# About

The following is the "development journal" for the contents of this project. In it is documented the major updates with GitHub branch and commit references. It documents the development process through the project capturing how the project evolved, what decisions were made, and what challenges were encountered.

## Author

Tayte Waterman
[watermanpdx](https://github.com/watermanpdx), [TayticusPrime](https://github.com/watermanpdx)
[Portland State University](https://www.pdx.edu/) (Student)
CS656 - Full Stack Web Development
Winter 2026

## Deployed Site and Source

Deployed site: [cs565-final-project-tayte-waterman.com](http://cs565-final-project-tayte-waterman.com)

Source repository: [cs565-final-project-tayte-waterman.com](http://cs565-final-project-tayte-waterman.com)

# Journal

## Project Initialization Hello World

Branch: `project-setup`
PR: <insert reference here>

In this (basic) branch `project-setup` I initialized the basic project base with the root `README.md`, `docs/` folder for containing `journal.md`, and the initial Node configuration. Installed packages include `nodemon` (dev) to support future development a bit easier (prevent stopping and starting the server manually) and `express` for the server. Placed in `src` is `server.js` which contains a simple "Hello World" GET response to just get the setup working.

I initially debated separating out the folder structure into a backend, frontend, and packages folder structure with a root and recursive `package.json` files for modularity... but decided instead to "keep it simple", at least for the initial implementation. I may revisit this if maintaining the contents in one structure become too difficult to manage. However, considering the scope of the scope of this project should be limited; one shared folder structure may be sufficient.

## Game "Engine"

Branch: [`feature/tetris-engine`](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/tree/feature/tetris-engine)
Commit: [ac9fc39](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/commit/ac9fc398c7e15015450610869017b57e9344cc54)

In this update I chose to first focus on the implementation of the base TETRIS implementation. As the website will be a multi-player TETRIS game, this is a core feature which is foundational to the purpose of the site, and must be available (at least in an initial form) to build the other features off of.

I chose to implement the TETRIS game within its own dedicated JavaScript file `tetris.js` to isolate it as a module for use within other JavaScript/Node components. I believe that this is also necessary to prevent "tangling" of code due to poor separation of concerns. I would like the contents of `tetris.js` to be focused **solely** on the game mechanics, and be abstracted from how the game is actually interacted with and viewed. That is, I want code elsewhere to define and bind what keys/event link to game actions, and "render" game states into a visual tetris game.

I initially linked the implementation of `tetris.js` into the backend code within `./backend/server.js` in an attempt to limit focus to the TETRIS implementation and **not** start on **React**... however, I found very quickly that this was impractical. My initial implementation "rendered" the game board to the terminal via `console.log()`, which helped to get started, but quickly ran into issues. In order to test user-input and special game-states like "a full row", it was too cumbersometo do this by hard-coding states and viewing it in the terminal; I found that I needed user-input and a basic, visual rendering to make progress on the game implementation.

For fear of coding myself "into a corner", I chose to build the basic frontent on [React](https://react.dev/) directly, rather than investing in (even simple) "vanilla" html and JavaScript. I separated out my frontend and backend into dedicated project subfolders `./frontend/` and `./backend/` to prevent confusion and clutter between the two implementations. For this stage of the implementation, I chose not to invest too heavily on React to keep focus on the TETRIS implementation. I built the initial frontend heavily following tutorials and online troubleshooting to "just get it running" ([React Getting Started](https://create-react-app.dev/docs/getting-started/), [Handling Events](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/27827234/how-to-handle-the-onkeypress-event-in-reactjs), [Resolving Issues with "Danlging" Event-Listeners](https://www.pluralsight.com/resources/blog/guides/event-listeners-in-react-components)). I acknowledge at this stage my React code may not be optimal. I intend to focus on this during later stages focusing on the frontend.

Using this, I was able to get an initial, basic TETRIS game up and running, and rendering in the browser. For this stage I chose to move the `tetris.js` implementation from the backend to the frontend to focus on the game-to-browser interaction. In future revisions, I will implement [Socket.IO](https://socket.io/) communication to link the frontend to game "engine", however for this initial step, I added directly to the frontend to reduce complexity. To support my desired separation of rendering and user-input from the game, all events are handled within the React code, and all games states are manages by `testris.js`. The React frontend binds keyboard events into `game` action calls, and the `game` object returns at each iteration an array of the board to be rendered and displayed. The frontend also cyclically calls the `update()` method of `game` to increment it in real-time. This will be removed from the frontend in future implmentations; it should not be in its scope.

In managing the visualization of the TETRIS game, I implemented a dedicated `Tetris.css` style-sheet for the contents of the game. Although I intend on using [https://getbootstrap.com/](Bootstrap) for most of my frontend styling, I think I will likely keep this dedicated style-sheet as its own file, and manually edited ("vanilla" css). Reasoning being, that the styling of the game contents itself, are very different from web-contents; they define specific game object (blocks, etc) colors and relative sizes. I do not expect them to need to (nor want them) to align to stylings for the webpage itself. Keeping this content as its own file keeps it separate from web-contents.

For the TETRIS implementation itself, I chose to implement the game and its contained objects (blocks) as Javascript `classes`. From previous experience, this is a common pattern that I have used in simulated, animated environments like this and choose to reuse this pattern. Again, given that the core game "engine" should be separated from webpage rendering and presentation, I don't believe that this should be an issue; and makes management of the game a bit easier (at least personally). I structured the game into a main `Tetris` `class` which is the sole object exported as a `module` for use externally. It is responsible for the game state, animation methods, and scoring. As the game is composed of many "blocks" which behave very similarly, I chose to implement a `Block` `class` which is contained and managed within `Tetris` containing all of the methods for managing block actions (move, rotate, check for collisions, etc.). Each specific block is a derived class of `Block` defining specific attributes such as it block-type, geometry, and rotations, initial position, etc.

Initially, I considered defining a base "sprite" for each block and implementing a rotation transformation when called... but found quickly that defining where the "center" of rotation was, and dealing with rounding became logically problematic quickly. Instead, I chose to simply reference the [TETRIS rotations](https://tetris.fandom.com/wiki/DTET_Rotation_System) directly and store them as a pre-computed array that gets indexed with rotation. (Likewise, for scoring I referenced the [TETRIS scoring](https://tetris.fandom.com/wiki/Scoring) directly rather than coming up with my own scoring scheme).

Some minor challenges I encountered worth noting. My internal game state (the grid of cells) is a multi-dimensional array; arrays within another array. I needed to distinguish between the current rendering window and a "base" rendering window. This is because the "active" block continually moves down the screen. I wanted to avoid having to constantly "clean up" old renderings of the block's last position, but still keep the "landed" blocks. To do this I implemented a "base" grid which contains all of the "landed" blocks, and a "current" grid which is the "base" grid + the current position of the active block. Since I have an array of arrays, I had to look out for shallow-copying and "leaking" changes to my "current" grid into my "base" grid. [Multi-Dimensional Array Copying](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/13756482/create-copy-of-multi-dimensional-array-not-reference-javascript).

I also learned that `classes` do not "hoist". That is, `classes` cannot be referenced above their implementation. I therefore had to pay attention to both where I implemented by derived and used `classes`, but also had to make sure the `export` declaration for `Tetris` was at the bottom of the file. I'm still not convinced that there may be some clever trick or better practice to bring this to the top... I plan to revisit this later in final code review; it works but I don't like that seeing what is exported requires navigating all the way to the bottom of the file...

Last, I ended this update without implementing rendering of the score, and showing the "next" block. My growing feeling is that these pieces may be their own components in React, and that I may be building too many frontend-to-`tetris.js` dependencies. Rather than continuing development of these features in this update, I've chosen to leave it as-is for now, and instead focus on the Socket.IO separation next. In the next major update I want to split out the frontend and backend concerns over Socket.IO and complete the full game rendering in React.

## Socket-IO Communication

Branch: [`feature/socket-io`](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/tree/feature/socket-io)
Commit: [4bda80f](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/commit/4bda80f345780962bdb2cede665ceb26f0002d79)

In this update I moved the contents of `tetris.js` out of the frontend and back into the backend and passed the game information and envents between the two via Socket.IO. For this pass (remaining single-player) this actually ended up being a lot easier than anticipated. Since the `tetris.js` already exposed interactions with its main Tetris class via methods, it was very straight-forward to simply wrap these in socket.io events. In example, originally where the on-key events in the frontend would wrap calls to the game object methods, they now simply wrap socket.io `emit` calls on the frontend, and the game object method calls are wrapped in the socket `on` events.

I ran into some minor challenges getting the socket.io communication initially set up. However, I found that this was mostly "overthinking" how I expected socket.io to work. I initially was under the impression that the socket port and the webpage port needed to be different, which resulted in overly complicated, non-functional code. What I learned was that the socket.io _protocol_ (above the IP layer) differs http; and can therefore coexist on the same port. This made the code substantially simpler. I likewise learned through inspection of the `socket.id` that the id is not that of the _client_ or of the _server_ but the socket.io connection itself. This didn't cause any issues, but rather was just contrary to my initial understanding.

For the initial setup of socket.io, I relied heavily on a [Socket.IO with React Tutorial](https://socket.io/how-to/use-with-react) for learning how to implement socket.io communication for the frontent.

Although the focus of this update was on implementing Socket.IO, I also made some progress in the React code for the frontend. In including the "next block" mini-screen and the score + "game over" text, I was able to break down the React code into more granular components. The modular "component" approach in React is turning out to be very useful. It allows for the webpage to be broken down into small, digestible pieces, and easily reorderd or duplicated in higher structures. This helped with the game rendering for the main and "next block" mini-screen. It allowed me to build each individually, and once working, easily orient them against one-another in the parent component. I'm really curious to see how fleshing out the rest of the frontend will go using React. In the next step, I intend to focus on structuring the overall frontend webpage in React.

## Frontend Update

Branch: [`feature/frontend-react`](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/tree/feature/frontend-react)
Commit: [6297257](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/commit/6297257ff943f7cae4910269f3eccf30c0c219b8)

In this update I expanded the frontend page with some of the initial web-page components. However, I did not end up completing all components as initially planned. For many of the features I will require backend data (leaderboard and user accounts) to proceed. And decided to pause here so that I can pivot towards implementing that content to support expansion of the frontend features.

For this update I added the navigation bar, modals for "how-to-play", "about", and a skeleton "login" menu. I also sketched out the "mini" leaderboard, and a second Tetris game window area. For all of the non-Tetris content I chose to use [Bootstrap](https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/getting-started/introduction) with React, as I've had some experience with non-React bootstrap in the past. Overall, I found it pretty intuitive to use, in that the React-Bootstrap content, although React-oriented syntax, was still describing the same "vanilla" Bootstrap content. In example, for managing columns, it is still possible to use `col-lg-X` to define relative width; just in a React way `Col lg={X}`. For many of the sub-features I relied heavily on the React Bootstrap templates: [Navbar](https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/components/navbar), [Modal](https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/components/modal), [Forms](https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/forms/overview), [Cards](https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/components/cards/).

Although the basic Bootstrap integration was rather straight-forward, I found this section of implementation a bit challenging. One of the major issues I ran into was trying to figure out where to best manage states between components. My initial feeling was that I should try and "encapsulate" as much as possible into the components and let them be more-or-less "stand-alone". This was nice for portability, but I found it caused problems with coordination of states. My main issue was that I encountered an issue where the binding of keyboard events inside the Testris game window, and overriding the default behavior with it, disabled the ability to enter text in the Login form. To allow both to use the keys as needed, I needed to remove the event listener in the Tetris component and reattach it whenever the modal wasn't present. As a general practice, I decided that I would do this when any modal was active (if asserted, I think its fair to assume the game is not actively being played). However, due to my earlier decision to bury the state handling within the modal components, I couldn't coordinate them overall. I had to end up removing them and placcing them at the App() level. I spent quite a bit of time iterating over how to do this before landing on the current pattern. I found that where to maintain states, when to pass data via props, and when to add dependencies a bit challenging and non-intuitive initially, but feel that its starting to make a bit more sense.

Last, I decided to clean up the Tetris game window. As the contents of the game-window are unique, and unlike other elements of the web-page (rendering game graphics rather than text or menus), I chose to give this component a dedicated .css configuration and control the contents directly via .css. This gave me a lot of control, however became substatially more time-consuming than initially anticipated. Trying to get precisely what I wanted with .css alone was rather challenging, and took MANY iterations to get working in the way I wanted. I may still revisit this as elements of the font-size (especially regarding responsiveness) are not completely to my satisfaction. However, to not lose progress, I will put this off to refinement at a later time. (Aside, block coloring also updated in accordance with [Tetris Guidelines](https://tetris.fandom.com/wiki/Tetris_Guideline))

For the next major update I plan on implementing the initial user-account + login including storage of data in a database. Depending on progress, I also plan to add high-score retention in the same database. This will be used to then continue the frontend development of the login form, and leaderboard mini-board and page.

## Login and Database

Branch: [`feature/databaset`](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/tree/feature/database)
Commit: [f43c58d](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/commit/f43c58dfaecda85afc37f5bbea9c0b5d11b5ebdf)

In this update I focused on implementing the first iteration of the backend database in order to complete the initial user-login, and leaderboard functionality. For this I used [better-sqlite3](https://www.w3resource.com/sqlite/snippets/better-sqlite3.php). Following some initial research I chose this package as it offers an SQL interfaces to data, but without the need for a dedicated, separate SQL process which must be connected to. Instead, the database data is stored as a local file and the database functionality is managed within the Node package itself. Depending on the database technologies that we use in the course (not yet covered at the time of this entry), I will adapt this code to those covered. Before knowing this, I chose better-sqlite3 to simplify interaction with the database and reduce installation and management of the database outside the Node code.

As part of bringing up the database, I also needed to complete the functional implementation of the login modal. This ended up becoming more challenging than expected. In supporting all the different login needs (log-in, new account, password reset, etc), there were many different views required and many similar fields; all of which contained data which needed to be added to `POST` requests to the server. I oscilated quite a bit between trying to contain contents within modular components and orchetrating states in the parent component. One issue I encountered was that burying the `Modal` class within components had the undesired effect of causing the modal to re-animate switching between views (since I was wholly creating new modals). I chose to keep modular components, but add them all within one `Modal` element and switch between views based on a `view` state. To do this I found that `if` can be encoded into the `<> </>` React contents via `{<truth statement> && (<> ... </>)} ([conditional rendering](https://react.dev/learn/conditional-rendering)). This ended up being a very usefull pattern that I ended up using to also control the "home" and "leaderboard" views on the frontend main-contents.

I encountered a small issue with `POST` where I could not post to the server due to different IP addresses for the frontend React IP (development server) and backend. I had to explicitly add a CORS policy on the backend for the React IP address + port to allow posts to get through. Right now, I am using the React development server, but for final implementation will serve the files from my server. At that point I should be able to remove this CORS policy.

I also decided to add a sub-feature in the leaderboard where games duration would be tracked and the date at which the score was achieved would be displayed. I was a bit nervous about time formatting, as it can get very complex if managed manually. However, it turned out that the built-in [`Date`](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/web-tech/express-js-req-query-property/) class made this very easy to manage. I was able to use this to easily get current system time, calculate total duration, pass date-time to the database `DATE` datatype, and format it for rendering to the web-page all with the native methods supplied.

To store score data to the database, I also modified the core `Tetris` code. I chose to further encapsulate some of its functionality by pushing the cyclic execution interval into the class and out of the server code. I also added a handful of call-back registering functions to allow the server code to pass functionality to the `Tetris` game to be called on game-start, update, and game-end. I've never implemented my own callbacks in a class before, but it ended up being very straight-forward in Javascript, and aided in separating out server vs game concerns. In my server code, I passed as callbaks the socket-io communication and server-side logic I wanted to be envoked, but was able to keep out logic about when and how such game-states were reached. This turned out to be a very usefull pattern that I intend on using further in the future.

One open issue, is that although my database is now implemented, I have basic login and score logic implemented, and a playable game environment running, it only supports one player. Splitting into a two player mode will require additional functionality, and a means for the server to distinguish between clients. I was initially going to try and split this out in this update, but found myself asking too many questions about the split while simultaneously trying to figure out the database and `REST` implementations. I chose to leave out the two-player management in this pass for simplicity. This will be the focus of my next major update.

## Two-Player Support

Branch: [`feature/2-player-mode`](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/tree/feature/2-player-mode)
Commit: [b5f42ee](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/commit/b5f42ee725cedec1f10dbf90073fa03bffa9003e)

In this section I expanded the game support from one-player to two-player to make it possible for players to play side-by-side from separate browsers. This update ended up being very challenging and time-consuming. Unfortunately, it also required heavy refactoring and reorganization of code.

The primary issues that I faced were architectural; I simply made design decisions that did not align well socket communication, or complicated it. My original plan was to have each `<Tetris/>` frontend component communicate with an equivalent `Tetris` class on the backend, each sharing their own socket communication. Unfortunately, this caused two major complications: 1. I did not fully appreciate that the socket communication was applied to the _complete_ client (not each `<Tetris/>` component), and 2. I lacked a clear strategy of how the 4 `<Tetris/>` objects would coordinate with one-another as 2 games. In short, this lead to a logical mess both in communication and state-management. After several hours and iterations over the code I ultimately had to fully restructure the game management and communication.

The first major change I made was to introduce the concept of "rooms". Rather than trying to synchronize "independent" game objects (which at any given moment may or may not exist), a room acts as a container for games to exist in, and for users to connect to. This eased how game states were synchronized (start together, prevent shutdown if the other player game still running, etc.), as well as how the games were connected. Initially, I struggled with how to render the "other" player game because it was "owned" by the "player-2" `<Tetris/>` component; I actually had 4 `Tetris` games! The `Room` and `Rooms` classes helped by brokering a game-space that both clients could connect to.

Once this was established, I still encountered issues with controlling and rendering the appropriate game. I encountered issues like the same game rendering to both `<Tetris/>` components, "flickering" double-games, and many, many unexpected states. Ultimately, I found that I was simply trying to load too much into "common" messages within one socket. The main culprit being the "render" message. On "render" the server sends the current state of `Tetris` to `<Tetris/>` for rendering. I initially believed, that by passing `username` info through another message, `game-connect`, I was encoding two communication channels. However, I was really just merging together two communication streams into one message resulting in race-conditions on which content was last sent. I was able to resolve this by splitting `render` into two distinct messages `render-primary` and `render-secondary`.

I also encountered issues with syncing player-name info and running states (between games) to the frontend `<Tetris/>` components for player-name rendering and start/reset button control. Considering the dependency on socket.io for game state coordination I chose to encode this information into sockets as well. This helped with keeping all game states under the control of the central rooms. However, to keep socket management within `server.js` I chose to link the socket messaging to the rooms via callbacks. As with earlier usage with the `Tetris` class this was very helpful. However, with multiple `<Tetris/>` components it was important to maintain multiple callbacks, each referencing different contexts and even different sockets (cases where the browser reloaded). Careful attention was required to ensure callbacks were properly cleaned up, else dangling callbacks would induce undesired behavior. I am not yet confident that this is completely clean. This will need to be audited during final review.

Last, while testing I identified that (due to multiple callbacks) duplicate scores were being written to the database on game-end. To resolve I added "UNIQUE" constraints on the scores table in the database, and explicitly removed the `onEnd()` callback upon write.

In the next set of updates I intend on polishing the frontend styling. The core functionalities are now more-or-less in place, but elements like the leaderboard and modals could be heavily improved.

## Organization and Polishing

Branch: [`feature/code-structure-and-visuals`](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/tree/feature/code-structure-and-visuals)
Commit: [688f42c](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/commit/688f42c16bc0da2167eed4bca61396111d2ca262)

In this update I chose to organize the codebase and "polish" the webpage visuals. I first focused on the `React` code. Although the frontend code was working, a lot of it was combined together in `App.jsx`. This made the code both hard to read, and also seemed to not fit with the general "component" paradigm of `React`. I decided to split each page and modal into their own respective files, and strip down `App.jsx` to a minimal set of components and shared states. This made the code both easier to read, and by extension a bit easier to read. Following this migration, I chose to work on the formatting of some of the key elements (see further). Having content dedicated into specific files scoped around major "features" of the webpage made it much easier to manage where content needed to be updated, and where to focus attention.

Following the file restructuring, I also updated the formatting of the webpage itself. I updated the "High Score" page and "mini" board to format the values in a more visually appealing way (spacing, rank, date formatting, "column" titles, etc.). I chose to give the site a very dark theme; all the high-score information in Bootstrap "dark" mode, and the background as black. Normally, I wouldn't have chosen such an aggressively dark theme, but considering that the game subject, Tetris, is "retro" game, I liked the dark theme as it was reminiscent of old arcade environments and machines.

During the formatting, I ran into a couple of issues. The first issue I encountered was in formatting the text-layout of the score entries in high-score fields. As I wanted to show multiple scores in each of the structures, I wanted to format the different score values to be aligned vertically, and spaced out horizontally from one another. I found that the use of the [`<span>`](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/tag_span.asp) tag very useful for this. Using `span` allowed me to control individual text fields and also apply fixed text length to individual fields ensuring consistent alignment (width styling). I also encountered a minor issue, where I wanted to shift the account link to the right-side of the Navbar. It turned out to be rather straight-forward using the Bootstrap `ms-auto` and `me-auto` classnames in the Nav groups ([bootstrap nav alignment](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/65253543/how-to-align-nav-items-to-the-right-in-bootstrap-5)).

In this update, I also addressed some minor and major bugs. The biggest bug I encountered was with insertion to the score database. In earlier updates, I had encountered issues with duplicate entries (caused by multiple writes) to the database. I attempted to fix this with the `UNIQUE` constraint on the table. This worked, in that it prevented duplicate entries, but did so via throwing an error, causing the site to crash. I found that the duplicate entries could be prevented without throwing errors via the [`INSERT OR IGNORE INTO`](https://mariadb.com/docs/server/reference/sql-statements/data-manipulation/inserting-loading-data/insert-ignore). I chose to use this rather than a try/catch block as I wanted duplicate writes to be supressed "silently", and also didn't need or want the frontend to be informed.

## Testing

Branch: [`testing/add-test-cases`](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/tree/testing/add-test-cases)
Commit: [7d48c4e](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/commit/7d48c4e5845f88645268e654f1ed11870e261457)

In this update I added testing for `React` components via `Jest`.I struggled a bit with familiarizing myself with `Jest` and getting it to initially run. Specifically, it took some time to familiarize myself with the syntax and understand how to define external conditions to the component under test ([beginners-guide](https://daily.dev/blog/react-js-jest-beginners-guide)). I found that the use of both []`jest.fn()` and `global.fetch`](https://www.leighhalliday.com/mock-fetch-jest) could be used as a surrogate for external functions (passed through props) and to "replace" the response of `fetch`. I also struggled a bit with just understanding the terminal response from the test results themselves; when failing a lot of `DOM` content is passed into the terminal and the terminal seems to show (at least in my environment) the results of previous tests, making parsing through it a bit challenging. I can appreciate how this may be helpful for CI/CD environments where the execution may be on a remote machine, and getting a fuller context is likely helpful. These issues were by no means blockers or even "issues", it just took some time to familiarize with.

Adding testing ended up being very helpful. I started with addressing the `Login` component, and as part of adding testing uncovered sevaral issues. In fact, just the exercise of _designing_ the tests uncovered flaws in my implementation. It helped me stop and carefully consider how the `Login` component should behave. I chose to add the testing after implementing the site contents. For this project, I still would have made this choice; trying to learn `Jest` in parallel with `React` and the other technologies would have been too much overhead to make progress. However, in future projects I think it would have been better to design and implement the component tests alongside or even _before_ the component implementation. The test design can help, and some cases should precede the implementation design process.

I also chose to make my tests very "granular". As an example, have many tests within `Login` around expected invidual fields, and state transitions. My belief is that the more granular the test-cases are, the easier it will be to trace and manage individual bugs. However, this did lead to a lot of repetitiveness in the test code and made it very tedious to implement. However, I still believe this is a reasonable approach. Reading through Learning React (2nd edition)- Chapter 10: React Testing, I tried to orient my testing around the "user" and how contents rendered rather than their internal states or functionality. Although I did need to include some external dependencies, I generally tried to orient the expected "results" around what the user would see: "Are the expected buttons shown?", "Was the right menu reached?", etc.

I then expanded testing to the `Leaderboard` and `About` components. This was a bit faster having familiarized with the syntax a bit, but I still encountered some challenges. One further challenge that I encountered was aligning the needs for `async`, `await`, and the `Jest` function `act()`. Although I was able to get content running, I had several warnings generated due to such misalignments. This seems to have been driven by the asyncrhonous way the component itself updated (having internal async needs like fetch). I was able to resolve the warnings following the terminal recommendation to protect the component rendering via `act()`. This resolved the issues, but I have to admit that I still struggle with fully keeping track of the `async`, `await`, and `act()` needs, and need some more experience in.

The last change I made in this update was to attach the added tests to GitHub actions. This was pretty straight-forward following easily accessible [tutorials](https://www.w3schools.com/git/git_cicd.asp?remote=github). However, I did run into one small issue. Locally, I was finding that `npm test` was not running over all of my components; there seemed to be some intelligence on only testing components which were detected to have updated. This is a nice feature for local development, but my preference was for actions to always execute all of my tests. I found [online reference](https://jestjs.io/docs/cli) to the `--watchAll` flag to ensure all tests would be run. I created a dedicated `test-ci` script in `package.json` with the flag added to resolve this... However, this resulted in the GitHub action hanging (never completing) on GitHub even though the tests for my components had completed (and passed). I found that this actually wasn't needed; that the pipeline automatically [executes all tests](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/58408035/whats-the-difference-between-watchall-false-and-ci-true). Removing the flag and using the default `npm test` was sufficient.

## Serving Frontend and Deployment Prep

Branch: [`feature/serve-frontend`](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/tree/feature/serve-frontend)
Commit: [`98d9e3d`](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/commit/98d9e3d7b84fe9254c33d76bab8150073213fce8)

In this update I decided to prepare my application for deployment. In the previous implementation the frontend was being served via the React tooling, and was launched as an independent process to the backend. The backend contained game and score logic, but was not serving the frontend contents. With this update I updated the backend to serve the built React contents [via `express`](https://www.reddit.com/r/reactjs/comments/1mtxknv/how_do_you_guys_serve_a_react_project_with_express/). The only "issue" that I ran into was that my frontend explicitly referenced my backend address. This works locally, but would be problematic if deployed as it would mean the retrieved frontend contents would explicitly reference `localhost:3001` (my local backend config). I struggled a bit trying to figure out how to align this; really just overthinking it. The solution however ended up being very simple. Since the contents are now served from the backend they _implicitly_ share the same ip! I only needed to remove explicit address references from my frontend code and update my server-api calls to reference `/..` rather than `localhost:3001/..`.

Following this update, I was able to successfully launch the webpage as one process. Only the backend needed to be launched. Then, after connecting to it, the frontend contents would be directly served from it. This works, but I still have an outstanding task to migrate my database from `better-sqlite3` to a propper database-implementation, and deploy the site. For this, I'm a bit concerned about orchestrating everything and managing dependencies and environments (deploying to a virtual-machine, other graders or reviewer environments, etc). In my professional life, my team and I regularly use [`Docker`](https://www.hostinger.com/tutorials/how-to-use-node-js-with-docker?utm_campaign=Generic-Tutorials-DSA-t1|NT:Se|Lang:EN|LO:DE&utm_medium=ppc&gad_source=1&gad_campaignid=16184995375&gclid=CjwKCAiAtq_NBhA_EiwA78nNWGKxob7RU4X5OG98zKkd9uSUeIZvWNEsi0VvU75iJRc07AFQQh8PEhoC5ZgQAvD_BwE) to control and deploy projects. Although not strictly required, I chose to add this to (hopefully) ease deployment and general management of contents.

I also used this update to migrate away from `better-sqlite3` and use a dedicated `postgres` server. As stated above, I chose to implement this directly via the `postgres` `Docker` image in order to better manage `postgres` installation across platforms, and more easily orchestrate it with the backend/frontend implementation. The migration was relatively straight forward, as both approaches are oriented towards a SQL database. However, some interactions needed to be adapted. Now, as the database is an external ip, calling the table required updates from synchronous to `async` and `await` calls. I found (and was a little surprised) that the SQL commands did not always map the same and required some adaption. Examples: `AUTOINCREMENT` vs. [`SERIAL`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype-numeric.html), `INSERT OR IGNORE INTO` vs. [`ON CONFLICT DO NOTHING`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-insert.html), etc. I also had to (slightly) modify my backend and frontend code due to changes in how the data (structure, and base-types) would return from the database.

Once migrated, I then chose to orchestrate the two containers via [`Docker Compose`](https://docs.docker.com/compose/). Here, I struggled a bit with trying to decide how to control and align parameters (mostly address and db account details). Through research I chose to use [environmental variables](https://docs.docker.com/compose/how-tos/environment-variables/set-environment-variables/) via a global `.env` file. This made alignment of parameters between the two containers rather easy. One element I got tripped up on though was the ip-address. I initially tried just setting `localhost` thinking that it would automaticaly be common between the two `Docker` containers within the same runtime environment... but this didn't work as they each have their _own_ ip addresses. Instead, I found I needed to explicity reference one ip to the other. Thankfully, this is already a [utility](https://forums.docker.com/t/how-does-a-container-resolve-the-ip-of-another-service-by-the-servicename/110091) in `Docker Compose` where I only needed to point the `backend` container to the `postgres` container. I also chose to add the `restart` [`unless-stopped`](https://github.com/compose-spec/compose-spec/blob/main/spec.md#restart) option to ensure both containers restart if crashed or issues. This is to (hopefully) ensure the highest uptime when deployed should there be critical corner-case conditions I may have missed.

It should be noted, I chose to commit `.env` to my project repo and reference it directly. This is known [poor-practice](https://dev.to/khalidk799/environment-variables-its-best-practices-1o1o) as it exposes potentially secure materials. In this case, it exposes the login information for the database. Anyone with access to the repo knows how to access the data of the database! A better approach is to exclude `.env` and instead just provide a template/specification for what is expected in it. I did this with an example `.env.example`, however I did not exclude `.env`. My reasoning was that, as a reviewed academic project, I did not want to "release" an incomplete environment, or obscure what code I implemented. I acknowledge this is poor practice in general, but chose to bypass it for full transparency of my codebase.

## Deployment, Cleanup, and Documentation

Branch: [`feature/cleanup-and-deployment`](https://github.com/watermanpdx/CS565-Final-Project/tree/feature/cleanup-and-deployment)
Commit: []()

In this update I deployed my website to a VM so that it can be accessed on the web. I chose to use [Google Cloud Services](https://cloud.google.com/free?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=Cloud-SS-DR-GCP-1713666-GCP-DR-EMEA-DE-en-Google-BKWS-MIX-na&utm_content=c-Hybrid+%7C+BKWS+-+MIX+%7C+Txt+-+Generic+Cloud-Cloud+Generic-Core+GCP-6458750523&utm_term=google+cloud&gclsrc=aw.ds&gad_source=1&gad_campaignid=20535180213&gclid=Cj0KCQiA2bTNBhDjARIsAK89wlEj4tiSWGBFDzxKv2_EiLrad3dJlzPbh_4JTTYf2V2W0ugQvirPPKkaAj8FEALw_wcB), and purchase and host a domain via [Squarespace](<https://www.squarespace.com/websites-start?channel=pbr&subchannel=go&campaign=pbr-go-de-multi-core_squarespacealone-mix&subcampaign=(squarespacealone-en_squarespace_e)&gclsrc=aw.ds&gad_source=1&gad_campaignid=23337823350&gclid=Cj0KCQiA2bTNBhDjARIsAK89wlE38HgeCI_2smqlgoA2AYoBqoEtXkqnqFpSokRy_ADsg_0fT94UCBYaAulMEALw_wcB>). Following the updates to contain the frontend, backend, and database within a single `Docker Compose` config this was very easy to deploy. I only needed to purchase a VM, SSH into it, clone my repo into it, and add the `docker compose up` call into `systemd` to ensure it ran when the VM started. Once running, I then only needed to add a firewall rule to my VM to expose the server port and I was able to access the site via the VM public (static) ip. I then purchased the domain [cs565-final-project-tayte-waterman.com](http://cs565-final-project-tayte-waterman.com/) via Squarespace, and via its DNS settings in my account, pointed it to the external ip address of my VM. One thing I uncovered that I didn't really like was that this worked, but it required an explicit reference to the exposed port (`3001`). I did some very cursory research and found that aliasing the url to an ip + port is not possible via the DNS in Squarespace, but is possible with reverse-proxying with services like [`nginx`](https://docs.nginx.com/nginx/admin-guide/web-server/reverse-proxy/). However, this would just add more complexity which I believe is stretching beyond the scope of this project. Instead, I chose to simply change `.env`, the defaults in `server.js` and the Docker port:port bindings to expose port `80` directly. Following this, the sight is now running on the web at [cs565-final-project-tayte-waterman.com](http://cs565-final-project-tayte-waterman.com/).

I also attempted to go through my codebase and review it per AirBnB Design Guidelines for [JavaScript](https://github.com/airbnb/javascript) and [React](https://github.com/airbnb/javascript/tree/master/react). This proved to be rather challenging as I decided to take it on in the final review. It would have been better to pre-review and incrementally update and review throughout development. Unfortunately, I fear that at this state of my code, my code is simply too large and complex for me to metnally capture everything. I have tried to address where I can, but fear that I have not been able to capture everything. Some areas I did find and address: I found that my local Visual Studio Code Prettier config was setting all quotes to `"` instead of the recommended `'`. I added a local, overriding `.prettierrc` config to reset this to `'`. I also found that there were several areas where I had stray uses of `let` where `const` would suffice. I modularized some of the `Math()` calls into helper functions to better describe explicitly what was being done (generating random ids, random integers, etc). I also pulled many constants out of React components where they could sufficiently be described at the top of their files.

# Conclusion

This project was very helpful in learning and applying fullstack web technologies. Of highlight, and the newest technologies to me personally, were socket.io, REST APIs serving through express, React, and backend database handling. With these technologies I was able to successfully implement a multi-player Tetris game rendered via React, but controlled via a backend with persistent data stored and managed within a PostgreSQL database.

I hade little experience with React before this project, and had never build an application this complex before including a database-connected server, or one with complex states communicating via socket.io. I learned quite a bit and gained an appreciation for the special skill sets distinct to frontend and backend implementation. I appreciated that this poroject allowed for such a broad range of topics to explore, and the freedom of design and exploration it allowed. I really feel that I've learned a lot from this project alone!

Of most remark to me was React. Coming from a more embedded background, React felt very unnatural to me at first. I struggled a lot with managing states, where they should reside, how and when to pass contents via props, and how to ensure components were updating when expected. I learned that often it is best to orchestrate states high up in the component heirarchy and pass to children rather than "encapsulating" too tightly within components. Add on to this the Jest framework, and it took several updates and a lot of debugging before I started getting a better "mental model" of how to use React. I appreciate its modular approach where sections of a webpage can be broken down into individual components. Doing so with each of the major components of my webpage really helped in the organization and mental-tracking of my webpage. In the end, I really like React, but can appreciate how much experience it may take to become skilled at it.

One area I really struggled was in the state management of the Tetris game itself and how it communicated with the front-end. As mentioned in the journal, I initially had a wrong model for how the games should be managed on the backend, and basic misunderstandings of how the socket.io connections were managed. I ultimately had to heavily refactor my server code to get it under control. That said, I still encounter some corner-case states which are not desirable (occasional needs to refresh before the game will start), but due to the current complexity have struggled to address them without other adverse effects. I beleive this is compounded by the fact that I initially was very unclear (still no expert) in how and when React component render and how they are called in their heirarchy. Since many socket.io messages initiate from the frontend, tracking all the possible states between React rendering, server game and room management, and socket.io connections; it was very challenging to get stable communication up and running. If I had more time, I would review this as I fear it is less than "optimally" robust. However, given the timing and breadth of this project I don't believe it practical to address this.

Although not directly in the core scope of the project, I found the deployment via Docker very helpful. Once I got the initial project up and running, I locally transfered it to a pair of Docker containers orchestrated by a Docker Compose configuration. Getting this running on my local machine, via the properties of Docker, meant that the project could then easily be deployed to other environments without having to worry about machine specific dependencies. Once the site was working locally via Docker Compose, transferring it to a VM was trivial.

The use of unit-tests and CI pipelines via GitActions and Jest was also very helpful. Honestly, although the testing framework is very helpful in preserving functionality, I found the exercise of creating the tests themselves the most valuable. I found many bugs not from executing the tests themselves, but just from the action of designing the tests and realizing I had made functional omissions. In the future I would propose creating the tests in tandem with the development or even preceding it. Although I added a pipeline to test in GitHub, I did not connect it to any GitHub rules in the project base, or connect it to further deployments. For the deployment to my VM I remote into the VM and manually pull the latest state of the repo. For a production system I would instead invest in connecting the testing into checks that gate automatic deployment of the repo contents into the VM. Rather than manually SSH'ing and pulling it, updating the repo via a merge should instead automaticaly deploy to the VM. However, for the scope of this project I chose to keep this as a manual process for now.

Last, regarding the overall codebase itself and quality of the website, I feel this project ended up being an exercise in "breadth" rather than "depth" in all areas. I feel that I was able to interact with each technology enough to get sufficient "depth" of understanding and experience for my own learning, however the quality of my weibsite slightly suffered due to scope. I fear the scope of this project may have been a bit overly ambitious. There remain some corner-case issues, I fear I have not addressed all style-guidelines, and I have not deeply addressed frontend checks for accessibility and and how reactive the site is for different screen sizes (frankly, it will not extend to phones both in size and lack of non-keyboard controls). As many of these topics have been covered in other courses, I chose to focus my efforts on the new technologies, and ensurince sufficient complexity in my application to demonstrate a "full stack" rather than making it perfect. Given more time I would spend more time in addressing quality and completing test coverage.

# References

- "Getting Started – Create React App," create-react-app.dev. [Online]. Available: [https://create-react-app.dev/docs/getting-started/](https://create-react-app.dev/docs/getting-started/)

- "How to handle the onKeyPress event in ReactJS," Stack Overflow. [Online]. Available: [https://stackoverflow.com/questions/27827234/how-to-handle-the-onkeypress-event-in-reactjs](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/27827234/how-to-handle-the-onkeypress-event-in-reactjs)

- "Event listeners in React components," Pluralsight. [Online]. Available: [https://www.pluralsight.com/resources/blog/guides/event-listeners-in-react-components](https://www.pluralsight.com/resources/blog/guides/event-listeners-in-react-components)

- "DTET Rotation System," Tetris Wiki. [Online]. Available: [https://tetris.fandom.com/wiki/DTET_Rotation_System](https://tetris.fandom.com/wiki/DTET_Rotation_System)

- "Scoring," Tetris Wiki. [Online]. Available: [https://tetris.fandom.com/wiki/Scoring](https://tetris.fandom.com/wiki/Scoring)

- "Create copy of multi-dimensional array, not reference, JavaScript," Stack Overflow. [Online]. Available: [https://stackoverflow.com/questions/13756482/create-copy-of-multi-dimensional-array-not-reference-javascript](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/13756482/create-copy-of-multi-dimensional-array-not-reference-javascript)

- "How to use with React," Socket.IO. [Online]. Available: [https://socket.io/how-to/use-with-react](https://socket.io/how-to/use-with-react)

- "React Bootstrap - Introduction," react-bootstrap.netlify.app. [Online]. Available: [https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/getting-started/introduction](https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/getting-started/introduction)

- "React Bootstrap - Navbar," react-bootstrap.netlify.app. [Online]. Available: [https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/components/navbar](https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/components/navbar)

- "React Bootstrap - Modal," react-bootstrap.netlify.app. [Online]. Available: [https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/components/modal](https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/components/modal)

- "React Bootstrap - Forms," react-bootstrap.netlify.app. [Online]. Available: [https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/forms/overview](https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/forms/overview)

- "React Bootstrap - Cards," react-bootstrap.netlify.app. [Online]. Available: [https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/components/cards](https://react-bootstrap.netlify.app/docs/components/cards)

- "Tetris Guideline," Tetris Wiki. [Online]. Available: [https://tetris.fandom.com/wiki/Tetris_Guideline](https://tetris.fandom.com/wiki/Tetris_Guideline)

- "better-sqlite3," w3resource. [Online]. Available: [https://www.w3resource.com/sqlite/snippets/better-sqlite3.php](https://www.w3resource.com/sqlite/snippets/better-sqlite3.php)

- "Conditional Rendering," React. [Online]. Available: [https://react.dev/learn/conditional-rendering](https://react.dev/learn/conditional-rendering)

- "Express.js req.query property," GeeksforGeeks. [Online]. Available: [https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/web-tech/express-js-req-query-property/](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/web-tech/express-js-req-query-property/)

- "HTML <span> Tag," W3Schools. [Online]. Available: [https://www.w3schools.com/tags/tag_span.asp](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/tag_span.asp)

- "How to align nav items to the right in Bootstrap 5," Stack Overflow. [Online]. Available: [https://stackoverflow.com/questions/65253543/how-to-align-nav-items-to-the-right-in-bootstrap-5](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/65253543/how-to-align-nav-items-to-the-right-in-bootstrap-5)

- "INSERT IGNORE," MariaDB Documentation. [Online]. Available: [https://mariadb.com/docs/server/reference/sql-statements/data-manipulation/inserting-loading-data/insert-ignore](https://mariadb.com/docs/server/reference/sql-statements/data-manipulation/inserting-loading-data/insert-ignore)

- "React.js Jest Beginners Guide," daily.dev. [Online]. Available: [https://daily.dev/blog/react-js-jest-beginners-guide](https://daily.dev/blog/react-js-jest-beginners-guide)

- "Mock fetch with Jest," L. Halliday. [Online]. Available: [https://www.leighhalliday.com/mock-fetch-jest](https://www.leighhalliday.com/mock-fetch-jest)

- "Git CI/CD Tutorial," W3Schools. [Online]. Available: [https://www.w3schools.com/git/git_cicd.asp?remote=github](https://www.w3schools.com/git/git_cicd.asp?remote=github)

- "Jest CLI Options," Jest. [Online]. Available: [https://jestjs.io/docs/cli](https://jestjs.io/docs/cli)

- "What's the difference between --watchAll=false and CI=true?," Stack Overflow. [Online]. Available: [https://stackoverflow.com/questions/58408035/whats-the-difference-between-watchall-false-and-ci-true](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/58408035/whats-the-difference-between-watchall-false-and-ci-true)

- "How do you guys serve a React project with Express?," Reddit. [Online]. Available: [https://www.reddit.com/r/reactjs/comments/1mtxknv/how_do_you_guys_serve_a_react_project_with_express/](https://www.reddit.com/r/reactjs/comments/1mtxknv/how_do_you_guys_serve_a_react_project_with_express/)

- "How to Use Node.js with Docker," Hostinger. [Online]. Available: [https://www.hostinger.com/tutorials/how-to-use-node-js-with-docker](https://www.hostinger.com/tutorials/how-to-use-node-js-with-docker)

- "Numeric Types - SERIAL," PostgreSQL Documentation. [Online]. Available: [https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype-numeric.html](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype-numeric.html)

- "INSERT - ON CONFLICT DO NOTHING," PostgreSQL Documentation. [Online]. Available: [https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-insert.html](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-insert.html)

- "Set environment variables in Docker Compose," Docker Documentation. [Online]. Available: [https://docs.docker.com/compose/how-tos/environment-variables/set-environment-variables/](https://docs.docker.com/compose/how-tos/environment-variables/set-environment-variables/)

- "How does a container resolve the IP of another service by the service name?," Docker Forums. [Online]. Available: [https://forums.docker.com/t/how-does-a-container-resolve-the-ip-of-another-service-by-the-servicename/110091](https://forums.docker.com/t/how-does-a-container-resolve-the-ip-of-another-service-by-the-servicename/110091)

- "Compose Specification - restart," compose-spec. [Online]. Available: [https://github.com/compose-spec/compose-spec/blob/main/spec.md#restart](https://github.com/compose-spec/compose-spec/blob/main/spec.md#restart)

- "Environment Variables Best Practices," dev.to. [Online]. Available: [https://dev.to/khalidk799/environment-variables-its-best-practices-1o1o](https://dev.to/khalidk799/environment-variables-its-best-practices-1o1o)

- "Nginx Reverse Proxy," NGINX Documentation. [Online]. Available: [https://docs.nginx.com/nginx/admin-guide/web-server/reverse-proxy/](https://docs.nginx.com/nginx/admin-guide/web-server/reverse-proxy/)

- Airbnb, "JavaScript Style Guide," GitHub. [Online]. Available: [https://github.com/airbnb/javascript](https://github.com/airbnb/javascript)

- Airbnb, "React/JSX Style Guide," GitHub. [Online]. Available: [https://github.com/airbnb/javascript/tree/master/react](https://github.com/airbnb/javascript/tree/master/react)
